[Music]
conclusions national security issues one
international drug trafficking
organizations are a threat to US
national security our government must
first acknowledge the threat and then
establish a more coherent and consistent
strategy for dealing with it
hearings before the Subcommittee on
narcotics and terrorism established that
the international drug cartels
constitute a serious threat to the
national security of the United States
and indeed to the stability of many of
our friends in the Western Hemisphere in
the United States illegal narcotics
exact enormous costs in terms of
increased crime lower economic
productivity and general health problems
in Latin America the cartels not only
create social and economic instability
as a result of their operations they
have also demonstrated the capability to
undermine government institutions
through corruption and violence the drug
cartels are multinational in scope and
operation and many instances such as in
the case of Colombia they used the
sovereignty of foreign governments as a
shield to protect themselves from law
enforcement activities directed at their
operations in the past when the United
States has pressed for action on such
matters as the extradition of cartel
leaders the traffickers have been able
to demonstrate through the use of
corruption and violence that there is a
price to be paid for cooperation between
governments on criminal and legal
matters the scale of the cartels
operations and the dimensions of their
economic political and military power
make these organizations far more
dangerous than any criminal enterprise
in US history they have access to
sophisticated weapons and intelligence
they have builded their own armies and
even have entered into alliances with a
variety of revolutionary groups and
military institutions in the hemisphere
in many respects they have taken on the
attributes of sovereign governments the
United States government needs to
recognize the enormous threat these
organizations pose to the vital national
interest of our country
the government should consider how to
utilize more effectively the various
political economic and if need be even
military options in order to neutralize
the growing power of the cartels
- in the past the United States
government has either failed to
acknowledge or underestimated the
seriousness of the emerging threat to
national security posed by organized
drug traffickers the reasons for this
failure should be examined by the Senate
Select Intelligence Committee in
conjunction with the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee to determine what
steps should be taken the operations of
the drug cartels in the 1980s exceeded
the scope of all previous organized
criminal behavior the subcommittee
received testimony detailing how cartel
leaders rented islands in the Bahamas
for use as transshipment points for
cocaine coming in the United States and
how drug related corruption within the
Haitian military during recent years
opened up another major transit point in
the Caribbean the judicial system in
Colombia has been subjected to such
violent assault it's almost impossible
to find a judge who will approve
imprisonment or extradition for major
cartel figures by late 1984 the Medellin
Cartel in particular consolidated an
important relationship with general
Manuel Antonio Noriega of Panama that
relationship became one of the most
significant developments for the cartel
in a country whose stability and
security has long been considered of
vital national interest to the United
States intelligence reporting on
narcotics issues has been marginal and
woefully inadequate the intelligence
reports reviewed by the subcommittee
failed to focus on the scope of the drug
crisis the political and economic power
of the cartels or the threat the
narcotics trade posed to regional US
interests
it appears the operations of the cartels
too often have been viewed as an adjunct
to what has been perceived as
the more important issue of east-west
conflict in the region law enforcement
officials and prosecutors during this
period have far too often focused only
on individual cases and rarely
considered the issue of narcotics
trafficking in the broader context of
national security however there appears
now to be a greater appreciation within
the law enforcement community on this
dimension of the problem than there is
within the foreign policy and national
security apparatus of our government in
some each agency with a responsibility
for waging the war on drugs has focused
on its own tasks and set its own
priorities this not only has affected
the ability of the federal government to
wage a coordinated strategy for dealing
with the problem but also in the
establishment of differing criteria by
which individual agencies view the
cooperation of other countries in the
drug effort because of the implications
of this failure for American
intelligence as a whole the subcommittee
urges the Select Committee on
Intelligence to review the process by
which intelligence regarding narcotics
is brought to the attention of
government officials the Select
Committee on Intelligence also should
determine if preconceived definitions of
what constitutes a national security
threat prevented the delivery of
effective and timely intelligence
reporting about narcotics trafficking
federal priorities 3 the threat posed by
the cartels should be given a major
priority in the u.s. bilateral agenda
with a number of countries including
Panama the Bahamas Haiti Colombia Peru
Bolivia and Paraguay it should be among
the most important issues with a number
of other countries including Mexico and
Honduras the subcommittee hearings
demonstrated that in some bilateral
relationships such as the case of the
Bahamas policy priorities of the United
States including law enforcement were
neither clearly defined nor regularly
reviewed in other relationships such as
the case of Panama drug
enforcement was considered but viewed as
less important than other foreign policy
objectives the members of the
subcommittee believed that narcotics
related issues should be given a high
priority within the State Department
u.s. ambassadors should receive clear
instructions on the importance of
narcotics related issues in the
countries to which they are assigned the
ambassador's should in turn regularly
report to the State Department on the
host government's responsiveness or a
lack thereof in dealing with this
problem the department should signal
clearly that our government places the
highest priority on diminishing
significantly the effectiveness and
power of the cartels while joint
eradication efforts such as those being
undertaken in Bolivia and Peru are
positive signs of the willingness of
other governments to assist us in the
war on drugs these efforts can only
promote marginal results eradication is
essentially a war on small farmers
struggling to meet the basic needs of
their families extradition of major drug
leaders and cooperation and diminishing
the capability to launder money will
have a much more significant impact in
curtailing the power of the cartels for
in order to convey to other countries
the seriousness with which the United
States regards the drug issue the
president should convene a summit
meeting of Latin American leaders to
ratify a coordinated strategy for
dealing with narcotics trafficking money
laundering and related economic problems
a summit meeting of the United States
and our Latin neighbors would signal
that the United States considers
curtailing international narcotics
trafficking to be of vital national and
hemispheric interest such a meaning also
should be a forum for the discussion of
economic issues which must be addressed
as an essential component of any
solution to putting the cartels out of
business US economic assistance to the
region is dwarfed by the amount of money
the drug cartels can bring to bear in
influencing the region's policy
and economies the United States must
accept this reality and begin to assist
creatively in developing long-term
economic solutions for Latin America a
meaningful debt relief program for many
Latin countries is an obvious first step
covert activity issues 5 the war in
Central America contributed to weakening
an already inadequate law enforcement
capability which was exploited easily by
a variety of mercenaries pilots and
cartel members involved in drug
smuggling in several cases drug
smugglers were hired by contra
organizations to move contra supplies in
addition individual Contras accepted
weapons money and equipment from drug
smugglers the subcommittee did not find
evidence that the contra leadership
participated directly in narcotics
smuggling in support of their war
against the Sandinistas although the
largest contra organization the FBN did
move contra funds through a narcotics
trafficking enterprise and money
laundering operation there was moreover
substantial evidence of drug smuggling
through the war zones on the part of
individual Contras pilots who flew
supplies mercenaries who worked for the
Contras and Contras supporters
throughout the region there is also
evidence on the record the US officials
involved in assisting the Contras knew
that drug smugglers were exploiting the
clandestine infrastructure established
to support the war and the Contras were
receiving assistance derived from drug
trafficking instead of reporting these
individuals to the appropriate law
enforcement agencies it appears that
some officials may have turned a blind
eye to these activities 6 there are
serious questions as to whether or not
US officials involved in Central America
failed to address the drug issue for
fear of jeopardizing the war effort
against Nicaragua
the subcommittee received testimony from
a number of individuals who asserted
that the US government failed to address
the drug problem because to do so might
have interfered with the war in
Nicaragua serious questions have been
raised as why our government waited so
long to deal with the Noriega problem in
Panama the Barry seal sting operation
directed at officials of the sandanista
government in Managua was prematurely
announced publicly by US government
officials shortly before a crucial
congressional vote on contra aid
therefore jeopardizing an ongoing DEA
investigation there are also serious
allegations surrounding the case of
general Boise or OSA a former Honduran
military officer involved in an
assassination plot
funded by money from the sale of cocaine
in the US against President Suazo
Cordoba a number of US government
officials intervened in the case of
Boise or OSA
who ultimately received a light sentence
in a minimum security facility for his
role in this episode the subcommittee
urges both the Senate Select Committee
on Intelligence and the Senate Judiciary
Committees to investigate these episodes
to determine if they had a deleterious
effect on the war on drugs 7 the
subcommittee
testimony of frank camper raises
questions as to what various military
intelligence units knew about illegal
activities the testimony also raises
questions as to whether or not military
intelligence was involved in improper
domestic operations the Senate Select
Committee on Intelligence should review
the testimony and consider whether
remedial legislation may be necessary
Frank camper testified that he had
reported violations of the Neutrality
Act to u.s. military intelligence agents
there is a question as to whether or not
these reports were forwarded to
appropriate law enforcement agencies
camper also testified to a number of
unauthorized operations which were
developed at his recon doe mercenary
training camp in dolemite Alabama he
maintained these operations were
reported to military intelligence which
allegedly did not interfere with their
implementation the subcommittee found it
difficult to assess the camper testimony
nevertheless in light of the serious
questions raised by his statements the
subcommittee believes the Senate Select
Committee on Intelligence should
investigate how the camper case was
handled and whether actions of military
intelligence were appropriate law
enforcement issues eight a primary focus
of the u.s. drug effort must be on the
major narcotics trafficking
organizations located in foreign havens
law enforcement efforts concentrated on
the pusher in the streets the
distributor in the US and interdiction
at our border have failed to stem the
flow of drugs pouring into this country
in recent years the public is witnessed
announcements by federal state and local
authorities of record drug seizures and
arrests of major distribution
organizations in the United States yet
more cocaine than ever before is
flooding our streets as evidenced by the
continued decline in the price per kilo
and the frightening increase in
drug-related violence in the
u.s. the current strategy is failing to
stem the narcotics tide because law
enforcement authorities are focused on
the least vulnerable level of the
cartels operations the pushers and the
distributors when drug salesman and
distributors are arrested they are
replaced immediately without serious
disruption to the overall operations of
the cartels themselves witnesses have
compared stopping drugs at the border to
futile attempts at plugging a funnel at
the wide end in addition many law
enforcement officials doubt whether the
current efforts to deploy high-tech
equipment and interdiction efforts will
produce meaningful results while the
United States must continue to develop
and implement a strategy for
interdiction the most significant
portion of the federal effort should
focus on denying the drug cartels
comfortable foreign havens where they
are protected by private armies and
corrupt government officials Senate
advice and consent to the ratification
of a number of mutual legal assistance
treaties would not only send a strong
signal as to the seriousness with which
the u.s. is waging the war on drugs it
would also enable us to deal more
effectively on extradition and
money-laundering where the cartels are
most vulnerable
in addition pursuant to the Omnibus drug
Act of 1986 the Congress provided the
administration with a range of sanctions
to apply to foreign governments which
harbored drug traffickers export
narcotics or facilitate the laundering
of drug money
however the Congress did not clearly
draft language which creates standards
by which the administration can measure
the full cooperation of other countries
the result has been that the
administration has consistently argued
against decertification for such
countries as Mexico and the Bahamas
while sanctions pursuant to the
certification process will not end
foreign official corruption they would
send a strong signal of US concern and
seriousness
members of the subcommittee urged the
Foreign Relations Committee to again
review the certification process and to
work with the executive branch to
develop clearer standards and a more
coherent definition of full cooperation
nine the president should deny customs
preclearance for any country identified
as a narcotics source or transit country
by the u.s. Department of State in its
annual international Narcotics Control
strategy report which does not fully
cooperate with the US and anti-drug
efforts in the Bahamas Canada and
Bermuda the United States provides
preclearance to foreign visitors in
addition a number of Caribbean nations
are currently asking the u.s. to be
considered for preclearance under
preclearance persons entering the United
States are checked by customs in the
foreign country rather than when they
land in the United States some foreign
nations especially in Latin America and
the Caribbean prefer preclearance
because it facilitates tourism and the
movement of people to and from the
United States generally the Immigration
and Naturalization Service also prefers
preclearance principally because it
allows I&S to exclude persons without a
valid right of entry before they arrive
in the United States by contrast the
Customs Service has expressed concerns
about preclearance because if any
contraband is found it remains in the
foreign country and the person who is
carrying it is handled by its law
enforcement system rather than that of
the United States for example the
subcommittee received testimony that
drugs seized in the Bahamas by customs
officials of that country were later
sold to other narcotics smugglers
accordingly the subcommittee believes
that the overall US policy of
preclearance needs to be re-evaluated in
major drug transit countries with a
substantial record of official
corruption or a law enforcement system
that has proven inadequate to combat
narcotics trafficking in the United
States
the United States should consider ending
customs preclearance in the Bahamas to
force that government to reconsider its
approach and attitude toward narcotics
trafficking 10 the existing distrust and
competition between law enforcement
agencies working on the drug problem and
agencies working in the national
security arena must be resolved ways
must be found to make it possible for
law enforcement agencies to have access
to national security intelligence
information and testimony before the
subcommittee it was apparent that
members of both the law enforcement and
the intelligence community's regard each
other with suspicion if not outright
distrust the intelligence community is
legitimately concerned that the
information it provides to law
enforcement agencies particularly
sources and methods could be eventually
disclosed in court proceedings the
primary concern of the intelligence
community is therefore to protect its
sources and methods and gathering
intelligence which could be critical to
successful prosecutions it is incumbent
upon the executive branch of the
government to devise a mechanism whereby
a useful intelligence product can assist
law enforcement efforts in the war on
drugs a workable system for protecting
classified information particularly as
it relates to sources and methods in the
criminal justice setting must be
developed this issue should receive the
serious attention of the Select
Committee on Intelligence and the
Judiciary Committee as well as by the
new National Director of drug policy 11
US law enforcement agencies should
devote more attention to
counterintelligence to prevent drug
dealers and organizations from
penetrating their operations the
subcommittee received extensive
testimony detailing the manner in which
the cartels have penetrated US law
enforcement operations at home and
abroad janitorial and clerical workers
have been bribed for access to files
low-level officials have been bribed to
find out the disposition of ships and
aircraft law enforcement radio
frequencies have been monitored and
police and federal agents have been
placed under surveillance the narcotics
trafficking organizations leave nothing
to chance they have hired former law
enforcement officials including police
investigators former federal agents and
former prosecutors who now work as
private detectives or private lawyers
for the cartels not only does this give
the cartels access to the identity of
informants but also access to
significant intelligence on the law
enforcement assets directed at their
operations as with any threat to the
security of the United States the war
against the drug cartels must rely
heavily on the use of intelligence and
counterintelligence intelligence
gathering and investigative efforts that
are compromised easily place our law
enforcement agencies in a virtually
unwinnable situation in this war one of
the first tasks of the new National
Director of drug policy should be to
take the steps necessary to remedy this
situation a strong counter intelligence
capability must be developed as a means
of reversing the serious compromise of
our law enforcement efforts 12
individuals who represent themselves as
working for the CIA or other national
security agencies of the United States
government and who in fact do not should
be promptly prosecuted to the full
extent of the law misrepresenting
oneself as a US government official is
normally not considered to be a major
crime however during the course of this
investigation the subcommittee found
that
individuals who became involved in
gun-running Neutrality Act violations
and even supporting narcotics
trafficking did so because they were
told that their actions were either on
the behalf of or sanctioned by the US
government given the number of
individuals involved in Central America
who were by turns engaged in activities
which were illegal illegal
official or unofficial the proposition
that some criminal behavior was
officially sanctioned is not surprising
it is evident that many individuals took
advantage particularly of the Contra
effort for personal gain while
representing that they were either
working directly for the US government
or undertaking activities with the
approval of officials in Washington the
subcommittee recommends that the
Judiciary Committee develop legislation
to provide civil and criminal penalties
relating to such misrepresentations
prosecutions of individuals who so
misrepresent themselves could serve as a
deterrent to others who may unwittingly
become involved in illegal activities
they think are officially sanctioned by
our government 13 the State Department
should make a special effort to control
multiple entry visas from countries
which are major transit countries or
which harbours drug traffickers
witnesses told the subcommittee that one
of the most effective ways for
controlling drug traffickers is to deny
their access to multiple entry visas
into the United States there is not a
legitimate reason for the United States
to allow anyone suspected of working
with drug organizations to enter and
exit freely from the United States an
example cited in the testimony is Lionel
Woolley a Haitian national who allegedly
controls the tonton Macoutes
organization in Miami and who is viewed
as a major player in the Haitian cocaine
distribution network in southern Florida
the State Department should therefore
re-examine the issuance of visas to
foreign nationals with suspected
connections to the drug trade and in
cooperation with the Department of
Justice seek the deportation
of such individuals 14 the Federal
Aviation Administration should undertake
a major effort to inspect the hundreds
of substandard aircraft many of which
are used for smuggling illegal narcotics
which are located throughout the United
States those aircraft which do not meet
FAA specifications should be grounded
immediately former narcotics pilots
testified before the subcommittee that
many of the planes they used to fly
their illegal cargos into the United
States or substandard the subcommittee
staff also inspected numerous aircraft
used by smugglers that could not even
come close to meeting FAA standards the
planes were not maintained their
instrumentation was inoperable and the
required logbooks were not kept one
plane vortexes famous n22 vx crashed a
month after it was discussed in the
hearings killing the pilot and the crew
the members of the subcommittee believed
that if the FAA closely inspected these
aging cargo planes each time they
appeared at the ramp of a u.s. airport
many would be removed from service
permanently such an inspection program
would make it more difficult for the
smugglers to use legitimate airfields
and airports in this country 15 the use
of criminals and undercover operations
should be limited to intelligence
gathering for criminal investigations
otherwise our government risks allowing
criminals to continue profiting from
their illegal activities on a freelance
basis while using their government
connection as a cover it is an accepted
fact that for a drug trafficking
informant to be useful
he must be involved in the narcotics
business undercover operatives provide
an easy and effective way to gather
information and evidence the danger
however is that too many informants
operate independently of their handlers
while law enforcement agencies are able
in large part to control informants
national security agencies have a more
difficult task because of the need to
protect an entire operation the
subcommittee encountered deliberate
efforts by criminals to cover their
illegal activity through their
association with law enforcement and
government undercover activity when an
individual criminal supposedly working
for the government is arrested for
criminal acts
the CIA defense is often raised
according to prosecutors the defense has
become especially commonplace in South
Florida and is frequently successful
however the subcommittee believes that
the pursuit of legitimate foreign policy
objectives should not require any agency
of the United States government to
assist a drug smuggler in any way 16
drug traffickers money launderers and
their criminal enterprises should not
receive federal contracts either by
inadvertence or design such contracts
can be used by drug traffickers or other
criminals both as a means of supporting
and legitimizing criminal activity the
subcommittee found that the State
Department contracted with four
companies controlled by drug traffickers
to provide goods and service to the
Contras in 1986 the State Department
also entered into negotiations with one
of these companies on its own behalf
after the company had been identified by
the FBI as the headquarters of a major
narcotics conspiracy in each case
federal law enforcement agencies had
information from more than one source
that the companies were significantly
involved in narcotics trafficking the
payment of funds by the State Department
to drug traffickers while they were
under investigation by law enforcement
or already indicted is compelling
evidence of our government's failure to
coordinate the war on drugs the
subcommittee believes that the State
Department should institute procedures
to ensure that all of its contracts are
reviewed by federal law enforcement
agencies to ensure that public funds are
not given to drug traffickers for State
Department contracts in
future money laundering issues 17 the
Treasury Department should begin
negotiations on gathering deposit
information on large foreign US dollar
deposits as authorized by the 1988
omnibus drug bill the ability to launder
large quantities of US currency is
essential to the success of the major
narcotics smuggling organizations the
subcommittee believes that tracking the
drug money and aggressive steps to
prevent the movement of large amounts of
cash are the most effective and
efficient ways to damage the cartels to
operate on a global scale the Colombian
cartels rely on banks willing to accept
large deposits of US currency while
maintaining the anonymity of such
transactions the 1988 omnibus drug bill
calls for negotiations with foreign
governments to require foreign banks
that accept US dollars to record
depositor information banks in the
United States must not only record such
information they must report it to the
Treasury the subcommittee recommends
that the president instruct the
Secretary of the Treasury to pursue
expeditiously and seriously these
negotiations 18 the United States must
take the lead in promoting international
anti-money laundering regimes and
regulations money laundering is a global
problem of enormous dimensions however
few of our allies have laws which make
money laundering a crime just as the
United States has taken the lead in the
development of international
organizations such as GATT to govern
trade and world administrative telephone
and telegraph conference WATC and
Intelsat and telecommunications the
subcommittee believes that United States
must persist in pressing for
international money laundering control
laws late last year the United States
became a signatory to the Vienna
invention which eliminates Bank Secrecy
as grounds for refusing requests for
information about financial transactions
related to narcotics activity the
convention obligated parties to take
measures making money laundering a
criminal offense and to enact laws for
the identification tracing seizing and
forfeiture of proceeds of narcotics
trafficking and money laundering in
addition the u.s. supported the adoption
of the Basel committees statement of
principle for the Prevention of the use
of banking systems for the purpose of
money laundering the US government needs
to follow up these initiatives with
support for detailed international
standards to inhibit money laundering
and to facilitate the prosecution and
extradition of narcotics money
launderers personnel issues 19 knock on
x law enforcement often takes a backseat
to other diplomatic and national
security priorities this is due in part
because the relevant agencies have
little regard for the people working on
the drug problem Foreign Service and
career officers in the intelligence
community have told the subcommittee
that working on drug issues can be
detrimental to even the most promising
of careers in fact young Foreign Service
officers are told by their career
advisors that working on as few as two
drug assignments can lead to exclusion
from consideration for promotion one
reason that some government officials
may not take the drug issue as seriously
as other issues is that those with the
skills and qualifications are not
rewarded over the course of a career
this attitude within the personnel
system must change in order to attract
motivated and competent people into the
narcotics policy area only then will the
narcotics issue receive the attention it
deserves within the various government
agencies 20
to encourage the most talented and
experienced personnel to remain on the
job the federal government must raise
the salaries of senior prosecutors and
investigators and create special senior
positions the present federal pay skills
make it almost impossible for the
government to keep its best senior
prosecutors private practice
opportunities offer three times the
federal salary and benefits private
sector working conditions including
clerical and research support and
benefits are generally far better
obviously the federal government cannot
meet the private sector pay scale the
gap in salaries however has grown far
too wide to permit top people from
seriously considering a government
career similarly law enforcement
agencies encourage early retirement for
skilled investigators who do not move
into senior management jobs for the most
part these investigators collect their
pension and then earn twice their salary
working as private detectives
consideration should be given to
creating a non management career path to
encourage the retention of especially
competent investigators 22 the Senate
Judiciary Committee should consider
prohibiting anyone who has held a policy
position on the narcotics issue for the
US government from working as a
registered agent or lobbyist on that
issue for a foreign government foreign
governments such as the Bahamas have
sought to improve their image in the
United States and to prevent US action
against them for their failure to
address narcotics issues a number of
foreign governments have hired former
officials who have had responsibility
for drug issues in the u.s. legislative
or executive branches the subcommittee
learned of situations where these former
officials represented their clients on
drug issues and meetings with current US
government officials if the drug issue
is taken seriously as a national
security matter the people who worked on
the issue inside the American government
and know our law enforcement strategies
should not be able to market that
knowledge to governments that are
working directly with drug traffickers
Neutrality Act 23 private citizens
should not be permitted to mount
expeditions from the United States
against foreign governments without
formal US government approval in advance
and prompt notice to law enforcement as
presently worded a violation of the
neutrality act is defined as action
taken against foreign governments at
peace with the United States
nevertheless a variety of private
persons became involved in supporting US
policy regarding the Contras in some
cases while engaging in non approved
criminal activity the result was a
situation in which it became
increasingly difficult for various
governmental entities including law
enforcement agencies and the Congress to
determine what activities were
authorized and what were not in criminal
cases brought in South Florida since the
iran-contra affair prosecutors and
judges have had difficulty proving that
freelance activities by American
citizens including gun running were in
violation of the law the subcommittee
believes that private mercenary action
must be subject to effective prosecution
a mechanism needs to be established to
ensure that law enforcement and other
relevant governmental entities including
the Congress can promptly determine in
fact whether or not ostensibly private
military expedition has been authorized
by the United States the chairman of the
subcommittee intends to file legislation
addressing a number of these concerns as
a companion to this report
[Music]
this is our hidden history
you